============
Case studies
============

Earlier in :doc:`../introduction/introduction-to-case-studies` we introduced
the Alice and Bob case studies where Alice is deploying a private government
cloud and Bob is deploying a public cloud each with different security
requirements. Here we discuss how Alice and Bob would address providing
networking services to the user.

Alice's private cloud
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Alice picks nova-network due to its stability. She understands a migration from
nova-network to OpenStack Networking (neutron) will not be easy, and keeps a
blueprint for the migration that is refreshed every OpenStack release. This
will ensure that Alice and her team are up-to-date with OpenStack Networking
features even though they are focusing on nova-network, and will allow the
migration plan to mature with Alice's experience with OpenStack to help enable
a smooth transition.

Alice configures nova-network with the VLAN network manager so that each tenant
will have its own virtual network, keeping in mind the VLAN trunking will
stress the environment and the scaling limit of 4096 tenants. She is aware that
all traffic will pass through the virtual networking appliance, however she is
comfortable with this given the hardware positioned to support the VLAN
trunking across the entire environment. Additionally, as the nova-network
hypervisor enforces the security group rules with iptables, invalid traffic
will not be an issue. To ensure this, she designates a quarterly review of the
security group rules for each VLAN. She understands there is no overlapping IP
space and has ensured the deployment systems have separate IP ranges with room
for growth until the migration to OpenStack Networking occurs.

Bob's public cloud
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A major business driver for Bob is to provide an advanced networking services
to his customers. Bob's customers would like to deploy multi-tiered
application stacks. This multi-tiered application are either existing
enterprise application or newly deployed applications. Since Bob's public cloud
is a multi-tenancy enterprise service, the choice to use for L2 isolation in
this environment is to use overlay networking. Another aspect of Bob's cloud is
the self-service aspect where the customer can provision available networking
services as needed. These networking services encompass L2 networks, L3
Routing, Network :term:`ACL` and NAT. It is important that per-tenant quota's
be implemented in this environment.

An added benefit with utilizing OpenStack Networking is when new advanced
networking services become available, these new features can be easily provided
to the end customers.
